Document about wallet backup and restoration (#22523)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/managing_wallet.md

# Managing The Wallet

## 1. Backing Up and Restoring The Wallet

### 1.1 Creating The Wallet

Since version 0.21, Bitcoin Core no longer has a default wallet.
Wallets can be created with the RPC command `createwallet`. More information about this command can be found running `bitcoin-cli help createwallet`.

The following command, for example, creates a descriptor wallet:

`$ bitcoin-cli -named createwallet wallet_name="wallet01" descriptors=true`

> If the node is running on testnet network, `-testnet` parameter should be added. Or `-signet` if on signet.

Author: Replaced with a table with default directories.

`$ bitcoin-cli -testnet -named createwallet wallet_name="wallet01" descriptors=true`

The `descriptors` parameter can be omitted if the intention is to create a legacy wallet.

For now, the default type is the legacy wallet, but that should change in the near future.

> By default, wallets are created in the `~/.bitcoin/wallets/wallet_name` folder. If the node is running on testnet, the wallets are created in `~/.bitcoin/testnet3/wallets/wallet_name` or if signet, `~/.bitcoin/signet/wallets/wallet_name`.

Author: This content has been changed.
A table with some default directories was added.

### 1.2 Encrypting The Wallet

The `wallet.dat` file is not encrypted by default and is, therefore, vulnerable if an attacker gains access to the device where the wallet or the backups are stored.

The wallet must be encrypted with the following command:

> `$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="wallet-01" encryptwallet "passphrase"`

Reviewer: nit: better to use consistent wallet name throughout the doc.
`wallet-01` vs `wallet01`

Author: Fixed.

The `encryptwallet` command is used only when the wallet has not been encrypted yet. Otherwise, the `walletpassphrasechange` command should be used.

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="wallet-01" walletpassphrasechange "oldpassphrase" "newpassphrase"`

The argument passed to `-rpcwallet` is the name of the wallet to be encrypted.

The term "encrypt the wallet" used here is not very accurate. This command encrypts only the private key. All other wallet information, such as transactions, is still visible.

Note that if the passphrase is lost, all the coins in the wallet will also be lost forever.

### 1.3 Backing Up The Wallet

> Wallets files are portable and can be copied. For safety, one should store backup copies on offline devices only.

Reviewer 2: Not directly. The `backupwallet` RPC or "Backup Wallet" GUI menu item must be used to ensure the file is in a safe state when the copy is made.

Author: Comment added.

> Wallets can be safely copied to another destination. This backup file should be stored offline, such as on a USB drive, another computer, or an external hard drive.

Reviewer 3: There is a way to safely copy a wallet to another destination, but most methods are not safe. 

I think what you want to say is that the files are portable and there is A way to safely copy them. I think the following encapsulates what you want to say.
```suggestion
Wallets files are portable and can be copied. For safety, one should store backup copies on offline devices only.
```

If the wallet and backup are lost for any reason, the bitcoins related to this wallet will become permanently inaccessible.

The command is `bitcoin-cli backupwallet "destination"`. The destination parameter must include the name of the file. Otherwise, the command will return an error message like "Error: Wallet backup failed!" for descriptor wallets. If it is a legacy wallet, it will be copied and a file will be created with the default file name `wallet.dat`.

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="wallet-01" backupwallet /home/node01/Backups/backup01.dat`

### 1.4 Backup Frequency

> The Bitcoin Core wallet was originally a collection of unrelated private keys with their associated addresses. If a non-HD wallet had generated a key/address, had given that address out and then had restored a backup from before that key's generation, then any funds sent to that address would have been lost definitively.

Reviewer 3: I think there's some conceptual cleanup to be done here and with the next paragraph on HD wallets.

```suggestion
The original Bitcoin Core wallet was a bag of unrelated private keys. If a non-HD wallet had received funds to an address and then restored from a backup made before the address was generated, then any funds sent to said address are lost forever because there's no deterministic mechanism to derive that address again.
```

> However, [version 0.13](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.13.0.md) introduced HD wallets. Users no longer lose funds when restoring old backups, as long as the addresses used were from the wallet's HD seed (since all private keys can be derived from the seed).

Reviewer 2: It should be noted that pre-0.13 wallets will still be non-HD

Author: Note added.

> However, [version 0.13](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.13.0.md) introduced HD wallets. Users no longer lose funds when restoring old backups, as long as the addresses used were from the wallet's HD seed (since all private keys can be derived from the seed).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, [version 0.13](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.13.0.md) introduced a deterministic mechanism from which to derive keys; HD wallets. Users no longer lose funds when restoring old backups because all addresses are derived from the HD wallet seed. 
```

> Theoretically, this means a single backup is enough. It is still recommended to make regular backups (once a week) or after a significant amount of new transactions.

Reviewer 2: Old backups will lose metadata, which may still cause financial loss due to not delivering goods, lacking info to pay minimal taxes, etc

Author: Information about metadata added.

> So, theoretically, a single backup is enough. But it is recommended to make regular backups (1 time a day or a week) or when there is a relevant amount of new transactions in the wallet.

Reviewer 2: Failure to do so will still lose metadata.

Author: Information added.

> So, theoretically, a single backup is enough. But it is recommended to make regular backups (1 time a day or a week) or when there is a relevant amount of new transactions in the wallet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Theoretically, this means a single backup is enough. It is still recommended to make regular backups (once a week) or after a significant amount of new transactions.
```

### 1.5 Restoring The Wallet From a Backup

> To restore a wallet, an empty one must be created  first.  The backup file then rewrites the `wallet.dat` of this new wallet.

Reviewer 2: This is kind of ugly. Do we not support restoring without overwriting an existing wallet??

Author: I think not. I opened the PR https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22541 that implements a new RPC command to restore a wallet without replacing an existing one.

> To restore a wallet, an empty one must be created  first.  The backup file then rewrites the `wallet.dat` of this new wallet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To restore a wallet, an empty one must be created first.  The backup file then rewrites the `wallet.dat` of this new wallet.
```

The user must unload the wallet and load it again after replacing the file.

```
$ bitcoin-cli createwallet "restored_wallet"
$ bitcoin-cli unloadwallet "restored_wallet"
$ cp ~/Backups/backup01.dat ~/.bitcoin/wallets/restored_wallet/wallet.dat
$ bitcoin-cli loadwallet "restored_wallet"
```

After these steps, the wallet balance can be checked.

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="restored_wallet" getbalance`

### 1.6 `-rescan` and `-reindex`

The `-rescan` argument rescans the blockchain for missing wallet transactions during startup.

`$ bitcoind -rescan`

> This is only necessary if there are missing transactions after restoring the wallet.

Reviewer 2: It should never be necessary (and probably not documented for end-users)

Author: Section removed.

> A pruned node, however, is incompatible with the `-rescan` option, since it does not have the data to check for relevant transactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A pruned node, however, is incompatible with the `-rescan` option since it does not have the data to check for relevant transactions.
```

In that case, it is necessary to restart the node with the `-reindex` command-line option to start over with the initial sync. The wallet will scan for relevant transactions during the synchronization and rediscover the funds and transaction history of the wallet.

`$ bitcoind -reindex`

### 1.7 Dumping The Wallet

> Alternatively, the `dumpwallet` command can be used to backup the wallet. It dumps all wallet keys (including the master private key) in a human-readable format into a file.

Reviewer 2: Might be better not to suggest this as long as it's buggy. (eg, #11803)

Author: Removed content about dump file.

> Note that this file is not encrypted and the keys are exposed. An attacker in possession of the file could recreate the wallet and gain access to the keys.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this file is not encrypted, and the keys are exposed. An attacker in possession of the file could recreate the wallet and gain access to the keys.
```

> The file is generated on the server-side and so the user must have access to the server folders.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The file is generated on the server-side, and so the user must have access to the server folders.
```

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="wallet-01" dumpwallet /home/node01/Backups/dump01.txt`

### 1.8 Importing The Wallet From a Dump File

> The command `importwallet` imports keys from a wallet dump file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The command `importwallet` imports keys from a wallet dump file. Importing wallets is disabled when blocks are pruned.
```

OR

Suggestion below for L112

Reviewer 2: It's not and shouldn't be, though.

Reviewer 4: Yes importing should be possible with pruning. But I get this error when I try to import.

Author: Removed content about dump file as suggested in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22523#discussion_r674488255

The first step is to create a new wallet.

`$ bitcoin-cli createwallet "from_dump_file"`

Then this command can be called.

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="from_dump_file" importwallet /home/node01/Backups/dump01.txt`

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

> :information_source: **NOTE:** Importing wallets is disabled when blocks are pruned
```

Author: Removed content about dump file as suggested in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22523#discussion_r674488255

# Managing the Wallet

## 1. Backing Up and Restoring The Wallet

### 1.1 Creating the Wallet

Since version 0.21, Bitcoin Core no longer has a default wallet.
Wallets can be created with the RPC command `createwallet`. More information about this command can be found running `bitcoin-cli help createwallet`.

The following command, for example, creates a descriptor wallet:

`$ bitcoin-cli -named createwallet wallet_name="wallet-01" descriptors=true`

The `descriptors` parameter can be omitted if the intention is to create a legacy wallet.

For now, the default type is the legacy wallet, but that should change in the near future.

> Wallets are created in the `wallets` folder of the data directory. The default folder varies by operating systems, as shown below. The user can also change it using `-datadir` or `-walletdir` initialization parameters.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Wallets are created in the `wallets` folder of the data directory. The default folder varies by operating systems, as shown below. The user can also change the default by using the `-datadir` or `-walletdir` initialization parameters.
```
Grammar nit

Author: Fixed.

| Operating System | Default wallet directory                                    |
| -----------------|:------------------------------------------------------------|
| Linux            | `home/<user>/.bitcoin/wallets`                              |
| Windows          | `C:\Users\<user>\AppData\Roaming\Bitcoin\wallets`           |
| macOS            | `/Users/<user>/Library/Application Support/Bitcoin/wallets` |

### 1.2 Encrypting the Wallet

The `wallet.dat` file is not encrypted by default and is, therefore, vulnerable if an attacker gains access to the device where the wallet or the backups are stored.

> The wallet must be encrypted with the following command:

Reviewer 5: Re: encryption.

This changes past policy.  See @harding [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui/pull/96#issuecomment-705046732) "no released version of Bitcoin Core has ever created encrypted wallets by default...there's an open question between experts about whether or not the use of wallet encryption in typical user wallets saves more money than it loses" and @laanwj [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui/pull/96#issuecomment-705064355):  "I'm partial to not encrypting by default.  In any case the kind of scenario where encryption works is 'other people have physical access to my PC but won't use it to install a keylogger/backdoor'"

Different users will have different private key management and backup schemes, so I don't think it is appropriate to say that they must encrypt their keys.

Reviewer: Is there a difference between encrypting **hot wallets** and **backups**?

Reviewer 5: Maybe, but I don't believe so.  Again, it depends what the private key management policy is.  For multisig for example, I believe it is best to keep the backups unencrypted.  You get both security and redundancy with the m-of-n scheme.  With encryption, you run into issues of relying on memory or how to store the passphrases.

Author: Right. Better to make it clear that the decision is up to the user.

> The wallet must be encrypted with the following command:

Reviewer 5: This satisfies the issue I brought up [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22523#discussion_r677926273)

> The wallet must be encrypted with the following command:

Author: Done.

`$ bitcoin-cli -rpcwallet="wallet-01" backupwallet /home/node01/Backups/backup-01.dat`

### 1.4 Backup Frequency

The original Bitcoin Core wallet was a collection of unrelated private keys. If a non-HD wallet had received funds to an address and then restored from a backup made before the address was generated, then any funds sent to said address are lost forever because there's no deterministic mechanism to derive that address again.

However, [version 0.13](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.13.0.md) introduced a deterministic mechanism from which to derive keys; HD wallets. Users no longer lose funds when restoring old backups because all addresses are derived from the HD wallet seed.

This means that a single backup is enough to recover the coins at any time. It is still recommended to make regular backups (once a week) or after a significant amount of new transactions to keep the metadata such as labels.

> Metadata cannot be retrieved from a blockchain rescan, so if the backup is too old, it will be lost forever.

Reviewer 6: nit: Although it's clear the statement is talking about metadata, It would add the world `metadata` before the `will be lost forever` to avoid panic thinking `the backup` will be lost forever.
```suggestion
Metadata cannot be retrieved from a blockchain rescan, so if the backup is too old, metadata will be lost forever.
```

Author: Done.
